## 2.1.0 (@@YYYYMMDD@@)

### What do I do after the install is complete?

You SHOULD read the "Install is done! What next?" at <https://diskuv.com/dkmlbook/#install-is-done-what-next> documentation.

If you had any existing local switches, upgrade them by doing `dkml init`, `opam upgrade` and `opam install . --deps-only` in the local switch directories.

For projects using [`setup-dkml` (part of  `dkml-workflows`)](https://github.com/diskuv/dkml-workflows#dkml-workflows)
for their GitHub Actions / GitLab CI:

1. Re-run `dkml init`, `opam upgrade` and `opam install . --deps-only` in your project
2. Follow the THIRD step of <https://github.com/diskuv/dkml-workflows#configure-your-project>

*And* if you have installed the Bytecode Edition, you no longer need it! Do:

1. Open Windows Explorer
2. Navigate to the folder `%LOCALAPPDATA%\Programs`
3. Delete the `DkMLByte` folder

### Major Changes

* `dune` upgraded from `3.8.3+shim` to `3.12.1`
* The installer no longer auto-installs Visual Studio Build Tools and Git for Windows.
  Instead you can use ["winget"](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/package-manager/winget/#install-winget) as described
  in [New Install Steps](#new-install-steps):

  > Windows Package Manager **winget** command-line tool is available on Windows 11 and
  > modern versions of Windows 10 as a part of the **App Installer**.
  >
  > You can [get App Installer from the Microsoft Store].
  > If it's already installed, make sure it is updated with the latest version.
* The installer has been separated into an *immediate* and a *shim* phase.

  The *immediate* phase is available immediately after installation, and provides:

  * `utop`, `ocamlc`, `ocaml`, `ocamlrun` and similar executables that work with bytecode in the global environment
  * `ocamlformat`, `ocamllsp`, `ocamllex`, `dkml`, `with-dkml` and similar self-contained executables
  * `dune` and `opam` are shims described below

  The *shim* phase is started when the first shim (`dune`, `opam`) is executed (or you can force it with `dkml init`).
  These commands will **first** configure the global environment *as needed* so that OCaml tools can generate native code:

  * builds the OCaml system compiler
  * initializes the opam root
  * creates the `playground` opam switch

  and **second** continue to do their original function (ex. `dune build`, `opam install`, etc.).

  Why separate phases?

  * The time to first start using OCaml with `utop`, `ocamlc`, `ocamllsp` and `ocamlrun` has dropped to single-digit minutes.
    The C compiler, assembler, system libraries and `git` are only needed for the shim phase ... nothing needs to be installed
    for the immediate phase.

    > I believe **time-to-first-use** is the most important metric for user experience.

  * The support burden drops; before I had to deal with bad Visual Studio installations. Now `winget` can deal with it.
  * System wide configuration options can be provided directly to `dkml init --system <more options>` rather than
    through user-written configuration files.
  * (Unexpected side-benefit) The separation made it fairly easy to run DkML on Unix. That means:
    * it is sometimes much faster to develop simply by building on the Linux/macOS platforms that OCaml development is highly tuned for
    * (hopefully) other Unix devs can contribute

* Installation directory has changed from `<LOCALAPPDATA>/Programs/DiskuvOCaml` to `<LOCALAPPDATA>/Programs/DkML`
* `dune` and `ocamlfind` are no longer placed in the global PATH.
  * Why? The global `dune` was confusing if you happened be in a directory where a local opam switch (and a local `dune`) should be. And `ocamlfind` interferes with other programs (ex. `dune`).
  * Eventually `dune` may be brought back to the global PATH when it (or the shim) becomes aware of its opam surroundings; that is, auto-install packages into the local opam switch, and builds code without any `eval $(opam env)` magic invocation.
* dkml-workflows now supports `darwin_arm64`

[get App Installer from the Microsoft Store]: https://www.microsoft.com/p/app-installer/9nblggh4nns1#activetab=pivot:overviewtab

### Known Issues

* Can't upgrade to `ocaml.4.14.1` because of a complex issue with `ocaml-lsp` and `dune build` on Windows: <https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository/pull/22902>. If your LSP is behaving oddly and/or does not have known bug fixes applied, you will have to wait until 4.14.2 is released at the end of the year.
* macOS installs to `~/Applications/DkMLNative` rather than `~/Applications/DkMLNative.app` with an Application Bundle directory structure. In fact, not even sure that OCaml can be coherently packaged as an Application Bundle.
* If you do move the installation directory or use the `--prefix` installer option on macOS or Linux, create a file `~/.local/share/dkml/dkmlvars-v2.sexp` (or `$XDG_DATA_HOME/dkml/dkmlvars-v2.sexp`) with the contents: `(("DiskuvOCamlHome" ("/path/to/new/install/dir")))`
* The opam sandbox is disabled because the paths to `~/Applications/DkMLNative` (etc.) are not known today to the opam sandbox. Worse, you can change the installation directory and the opam sandbox won't know about it.

### Architectures

| Architecture       | Reason                                        |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------------------- |
| ✅︎ `windows_x86_64` |                                               |
| ❌ `windows_x86`    | Haven't gotten around to it setting up CI     |
| ✅︎ `darwin_arm64`   |                                               |
| ❌ `darwin_x86_64`  | Resolvable issue with old `ctypes.0.19.2` (1) |
| ❌ `linux_x86_64`   | Issue with `ocaml-lsp-server.1.16.2` (2)      |
| ❌ `linux_x86`      | Haven't gotten around to it setting up CI     |
| ✅︎ `debian_x86_64`  | (3)                                           |

* (1) This architecture has problems building with an old, patched version of `ctypes.0.19.2`. There is no problem with `darwin_arm64`. So likely easy to fix but low-priority.
* (2) This architecture is built with ManyLinux 2014, which has an ancient glibc so it is portable to most Linux distros. However, ocaml-lsp-server.1.16.2 submodules the `lev` package which does not compile with ManyLinux. Unclear why but not investigating because very low-priority.
* (3) Built from Debian stable (currently 12 "bookworm") so it works only with Debian.

### Bug Fixes

* Fix bug where the cross-compiler `ocaml` interpreter (ex. darwin_x86 -> darwin_arm64) was hardcoded
  with the cross-compiled standard library rather than the host standard library.
* `OPAMROOT` is respected during installation.

### New Install Steps

#### Windows

Windows 11 users already have `winget`, but Windows 10 users will need to [get App Installer from the Microsoft Store].

Then run these three steps from the Command Prompt or PowerShell:

```powershell
# Visual Studio 2019 Build Tools
# ------------------------------
#
# You can change "--installPath" if you need disk space (3GB+), but do not use spaces or parentheses. Bad: C:\Program Files (x86)
# You can review what components are installed at:
#   https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/install/workload-component-id-vs-build-tools?view=vs-2019
winget install Microsoft.VisualStudio.2019.BuildTools --override "--wait --passive --installPath C:\VS --addProductLang En-us --add Microsoft.VisualStudio.Workload.VCTools --includeRecommended"

# Git for Windows
# ---------------
#
# You won't need this if you already have git.
winget install Git.Git

# Dkml
# ----
winget install Diskuv.OCaml
```

Because `winget` does not install dependencies, a design was made to allow the `winget` packages to install
in any order. The practical consequence is that the first time you run any global command that could compile
native code (ex. `opam`, `dune` and `dkml init` but not `ocaml` or `ocamlc`):

1. The OCaml system compiler will be built using the available, compatible Visual Studio
   (Visual Studio 2019 Build Tools or Visual Studio 2019 Community/Professional/Enterprise).
2. The opam root will be initialized.
3. The global "playground" switch will be installed.

You can do those steps now with a **new** Command Prompt or PowerShell window:

```powershell
# IMPORTANT: If you run Windows in a VirtualBox, or have a computer manufactured before 2013 (ie. pre-Haswell or
# pre-Piledriver CPU), run the following instead to avoid https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/issues/12513:
#   dkml init --system --enable-imprecise-c99-float-ops
dkml init --system
```

#### macOS/Silicon

```sh
wget https://TODO/dkml-native-darwin_arm64-i-2.1.0.tar.gz
install -d installer && tar xCfz installer dkml-native-darwin_arm64-i-2.1.0.tar.gz --strip-components 1
installer/sg/staging-ocamlrun/darwin_arm64/bin/ocamlrun installer/bin/dkml-package.bc -vv && rm -rf installer

~/Applications/DkMLNative/bin/utop # Use any DkML executables. Place the bin/ and usr/bin/ directory in your PATH.
```

### Internal Changes

### Upgraded Packages

| Package       | From       | To     |
| ------------- | ---------- | ------ |
| conf-withdkml | 2          | 3      |
| lambda-term   | 3.3.1      | 3.3.2  |
| lwt           | 5.6.1      | 5.7.0  |
| zed           | 3.2.2      | 3.2.3  |
| dune          | 3.8.3+shim | 3.12.1 |
| xdg           | 3.9.0      | 3.12.1 |

### Likely Permanent Incompatibilities

* The `diskuv-opam-repository`, in particular patches for `ocaml-config`, are required in addition to the main opam repository. The correct repositories are selected when `dkml init` is used to create a local switch. Why can't it be upstreamed? There were changes done to the `ocaml-config` package to recognize the process name `ocaml-real` that comes from the shim `ocaml <spawns> ocaml-real`. The shim is required to get OCaml to accept arbitrary user installation directories (aka. "relocation"). However, new versions past `ocaml-config.3` are restricted to only OCaml 5 which is not an option for DkML.
